---
layout: post
---
Wow, What a second day! Io is so awesome. You can do a lot things with so little effort.

In this awesome day (it took me at least three days to complete it...) I have learned conditional, loops, operators, messages and reflection. I have to say that the messages are not clearly explained (I think it is because of the example that the author proposes), but I have resolved some of the exercises for the day with messages reflection and I really like it.

So, what exercises did I do in Io day two?

- Fibonacci sequence
  I have only done the recursive one (I do not know how to resolve the iterative one :S). I have use only methods, without prototypes:

        fib := method(number, if(number == 1, 1, fib2(number, 1, 1)))
        fib2 := method(number, f0, f1, if(number == 2, f1, fib2(number - 1, f1, f0 + f1)))

        for(i,1,20,fib(i) println)

  Very simple, but it helped me to understand how conditional work in Io. The cool thing about that "if" is that it first executes the condition and then decides what code to execute, the one in the true path or the one in the false path. In this case, for the method "fib", it only executes the "fib2" method if the number is not equal to 2.

- Change / operator to return 0 if the denominator is 0

        originalDiv := Number getSlot("/")
        Number / := method(d,if(d == 0, 0, self originalDiv(d)))

  What this code does is store the "/" slot in the prototype Number in an object and assign a new method to the "/" operator. In that method, we use the original behavior for the slot "/" to perform the division only if the denominator is not 0.

- Add up all the numbers in a two-dimensional array

        list(list(1,2,3), list(4,5,6)) map(sum) sum

  This very similar to how arrays work in Ruby, as we show last week.

- Add a slot calles myAverage to a list that computes the average of all the numbers in a list. What happens if there are no numbers in a list?

        List myAverage := method(self sum / self size)

  We are using reflection to access the object that is executing the message. We can achieve the same using reflection over the message:

        List myAverageWithTarget := method(call target sum / call target size)

  So, the target of this message is the list we are asking the average:

        list(1,2,3) myAverage println
        >2
        list(1,2,3) myAverageWithTarget println
        >2

- Write a prototype for a two-dimensional list. The dim(x,y) method should allocate a list of y lists that are x elements long, set(x,y,value) should set a value, and get(x,y) should return that value

  Before we start with this one, I have to say that the code I wrote is awful. Please, show me better ways to create the matrix.

        Matrix := List clone
        Matrix dim := method(x, y,  matrix := Matrix clone; for(i,1,y, row := list(); matrix append( for(j,1,x,row append(0)))))

        Matrix set := method(x,y,value, self at(x) atPut(y,value); self)
        Matrix get := method(x,y, self at(x) at(y))

- Write a transpose method for the matrix

  I do not like this code either :(

        Matrix transpose := method(n_m := Matrix dim(self size, self at(0) size); self foreach(c, column, column foreach(r, e, n_m set(r,c,e)));n_m)

- Write the matrix to a File, and read the matrix from a file

        File with("matrix.txt") openForUpdating write(m serialized) close
        doFile("matrix.txt") println

- Write a program that gives you ten tries to guess a random number form 1-100

  I really enjoyd this exercise. I have used message reflection because I wanted to use my "program" like this:

        3 guess

  It means guess the number given that it is a 3. For a random number the codes goes like:

        Random value(100) ceil guess

  The code for the program is:

        tryAGuess := method(input, input readLine asNumber == call sender asNumber)
        Number guess := method(10 repeat(if(tryAGuess(File standardInput), return "Right" println, "Wrong" println)))

  Forget the tryAGuess method. What I am doing here is adding a the slot "guess" to Number. The "guess" slot is a method that repeats 10 times an if. That if finds out if the guess is correct (We will see how in a moment). If it is right it ends the loop, if it is not it continues with the loop.
  The tryAGuess method asks the user for a guess via standard input and compares the user's guess with "call sender asNumber". The sender of the message tryAGuess is the number to guess (it is in the if condition), so when we do "call sender" we are getting the number to guess. I do not know exactly why do we need the asNumber yet :( Any clue?

You can have a look at the [exercises on github](https://github.com/plagelao/7languages7weeks/tree/exercises/io/day-2).

See you tomorrow!
