---
layout: post
---
The second language in the book is Io.

Io is a prototype language, like javascript. I'm not very good with javascript (I know, I have to try harder), so I hope Io helps me to understand how prototype languages work. I understand the paradime, but I need to gain a lot of knowledge to use any of those languages in a "pro" way.

The first thing I've liked about Io is that you send messages to the objects :) Instead of "calling a method" we send messages. I think that can help us a lot with our design once we start building complex programs. We'll see.

I also like a lot how simple Io syntax is. There are no exceptions in the syntax rules, things can only be done in one way. That makes it really easy to start playing with Io.

There are none exercises for this day, but the author asks some questions:

- Is Io strongly typed or weakly typed?
I don't know how to answer this question. Io is a prototype language, and I don't think it cares about types. It has a slot named type, but it is not a "type" as in Ruby (A class was a type in Ruby). The slot type is only informative. But, why 1 + "one" throws an error asking for a Number instead of a 'Sequence'? Let's have a look at how + works:

  Io> 1 getSlot("+")
  ==> Number_+()
  Io> add := Number getSlot("+")
  ==> Number_+()
  Io> 1 add(2)
  ==> 3
  Io> add
  Exception: CFunction defined for type Number but called on type Object

Ok! So the operator "+" is a [CFunction](https://gist.github.com/stevedekorte/io/blob/master/docs/reference/Core/Core/CFunction/index.html) :) Io is written in C. I imagine that "+" is implemented using the C primitives for the integers(it uses doubles).

So, summarizing, Io is not strongly or weakly typed. It implementation is strongly typed (but I think that only for numbers).

- Is 0 true or false? what about the empty string? and nil?
0 and "" are true, nil is false, as you can see if you execute those commands:

  0 or false
  "" or false
  nil and true

- How can you tell what slots a prototype supports?
To know all the slots a prototype supports we just need to call slotNames. Let's see how it works with Object:

  Io> Object slotNames
  ==> list(newSlot, ownsSlots, foreachSlot, currentCoro, <, removeAllSlots, list, for, doString, uniqueHexId, clone,
  become, write, evalArgAndReturnNil, setSlotWithType, isNil, method, block, pause, isActivatable, deprecatedWarning,
  isLaunchScript, coroWith, evalArg, uniqueId, ?, ifError, serializedSlots, actorProcessQueue, do, in, setProto, super,
  writeln, setSlot, !=, inlineMethod, justSerialized, doRelativeFile, removeAllProtos, coroDo, asyncSend, continue,
  stopStatus, ancestorWithSlot, print, protos, evalArgAndReturnSelf, actorRun, not, type, and, return, break,
  slotSummary, >, message, ==, slotNames, ifNonNilEval, asSimpleString, serializedSlotsWithNames, hasLocalSlot, while,
  updateSlot, serialized, switch, perform, asString, hasSlot, try, returnIfNonNil, hasProto, prependProto, getSlot, wait,
  hasDirtySlot, thisContext, removeProto, appendProto, println, lazySlot, loop, slotDescriptionMap, launchFile, ..,
  relativeDoFile, compare, , yield, init, resend, isTrue, lexicalDo, or, doFile, argIsActivationRecord, isError, ancestors,
  isIdenticalTo, ifNil, ifNilEval, performWithArgList, cloneWithoutInit, contextWithSlot, thisLocalContext, >=, if, isKindOf,
  memorySize, <=, ifNonNil, coroFor, thisMessage, apropos, @, getLocalSlot, returnIfError, markClean, coroDoLater, slotValues,
  -, doMessage, proto, raiseIfError, setIsActivatable, futureSend, removeSlot, shallowCopy, handleActorException, @@, setProtos,
  argIsCall)

We can also use "do" instead of "slotNames", but I let you discover what it does ;)

- What's the difference between =, := and ::=? When should you use each one?
:= creates a new slot and assigns a value to that slot. = assigns a value to an existing slot. If we use = with a new slot Io throws an exception.
::= creates a new slot, assigns a value for that slot and creates a setter for that slot. What does it meansto create a setter? You can [have a look at this link](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/5972327/whats-the-difference-between-newslot-and-setslot-in-the-io-language)

He also asks us to:
- run an Io program from a file.
You can see [my program here](https://github.com/plagelao/7languages7weeks/blob/exercises/io/day-1/program.io), but it is not very much...

- execute the code in a slot given its name.

  aClone := Object clone
  anotherClone := Object doString("clone")


See you tomorrow!

